[SourceID: 1] Introduction
Many elderly patients with small cell lung cancer (SCLC) receive less chemotherapywith more dose reductions and fewer cycles because they may have a lesser ability to tolerate these therapies (1,2). Although an age-related decrease in physi-ologic functions including the glomerular filtration rate is well known(3), increased age is not always associated with reduced function (4).
The combination of carboplatin and etoposide has been proven synergistic against animal tumor models (5, 6). Chatelut's carboplatin calculation dosage formula (Fig. 1) is useful for elderly patients, as it includes age, sex, body weight and serum creatinine as the parameters, and excludes 24-hour creatinine clearance (7).

[SourceID: 2] Patients and Methods
Pa tien t eligibility Patient selection was restricted to those over 70 years of age with no prior chemotherapy or radiotherapy, with histologically or cytologically proven SCLC. Eligibility stipulated measurable or evaluable disease, performance status of 0-3 on the ECOGscale, adequate hepatic function with serum transaminases <2 times upper limit of normal and normal total biliru-
bin, adequate renal function with normal serum creatinine, adequate pretreatment bone marrowreserve (leukocyte count >4,000/|ll1, and platelet count >100xl03/|nl), and adequate cardiac functions. Written informed consent was obtained from all patients.

[SourceID: 3] Dose calculation and administration
Patients were treated in cohorts of at least three individuals.
The study was designed to escalate the doses of both etoposide and carboplatin until the maximumtolerated dose (MTD) was reached. Decisions to escalate the doses were based upon acute toxicities in cycle 1. Dose escalation continued with the following dose levels of carboplatin (mg/ml-min)/etoposide (mg/ m2) evaluated: 4/90, 4/100, 4.5/100, 5/100 (Table 1). Toxicities were graded according to the World Health Organization (WHO) criteria (8). Dose limiting-toxicity (DLT) was defined as at least one of the following: 1) Absolute neutrophil count (ANC)of <500/|il for >3 days or associated with fever exceeding 38°C; 2) platelet count of <25,000/nl; or 3) grade 3 non-  Level4. AUC5 100 mg/m2
CBDCA: carboplatin, ETP: etoposide, Pits.: platelets, ANC: absolute neutrophil count. *One: massive pleural effusion, **One: bone marrow infiltration. #One patient whoreceived level 4 chemotherapy experienced neutropenic fever and grade 4 neutropenia continuing more than three days using recombinant colony stimulating factor. Another one patient experienced grade 3 thrombocytopenia and neutropenia.
hematologic toxicities excluding nausea/vomiting and alopecia. The MTDwas defined as the dose at which >33.3% of the patients experienced DLTduring the first cycle of chemotherapy.
The carboplatin dose which was determined based on Chatelut' s formula (7) was administered on day 1 intravenously over one hour in a 500 ml dextrose solution. The use of recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (rhG-CSF) was allowed only for patients whodeveloped grade 3 or worse leukopenia. Chest irradiation at a dose of 45 Gy in 30 accelerated hyperfractionations over three weeks was given for patients with limited disease (LD) after four cycles of chemotherapy.

[SourceID: 4] Dose modification
Etoposide dose was reduced on the next cycle to 80 mg/m2/ day whengrade 4 hematologic toxicities were observed during the previous chemotherapy course, and if the platelet count was under 2.5xlO4/jil, only 90% of the calculated dose carboplatin was injected. If grade 2 non-hematologic toxicities excluding nausea/vomiting and alopecia were observed, the following chemotherapy was postponed until the toxicities were completely recovered. If grade 3 or greater non-hematologic toxicities excluding nausea/vomiting and alopecia were observed, chemotherapy was to be discontinued.

[SourceID: 5] Response, and response duration
Tumorresponses were classified in accordancewith the WHO criteria (8). The duration of the response was measured from the start of the treatment to disease progression. Patients who did not achieve a complete response (CR) or partial response (PR) after a second course were removedfrom the study.

[SourceID: 6] Characteristics of patients
Between March 1995 and December 1998, 17 patients were enrolled. There were 13 menand four womenwith a median age of 77 years (range 7 1-87). Eleven patients had limited disease and six had extensive disease. The ECOGperformance status (PS) was 0-1 in twelve patients and 3 in one patient. A patient with a PS of 3 was treated at dose level 2, and his condition got better with a PS 2 after the first course.
The study was approved in advance by our hospital's Institutional Review Broad.
Trea tmen t received Three to five patients were enrolled at each dose level. All
Carboplatin Plus Etoposide for Elderly SCLC

[SourceID: 7] Hematologic toxicity and dose-limiting toxicity
One of the major clinical toxicities observed during this study was bone marrow suppression, principally neutropenia (Table 1). Grade 4 neutropenia was observed already at the first dose level; however, in all such occurrences, at levels 1-3, grade 4 neutropenia recovered within 3 days and those were thus not considered DLTs. The MTDwas reached at dose level 4 because three of four patients experienced DLTs(grade 4 neutropenia; grade 4 thrombocytopenia; and neutropenic fever). Grade 3 anemia was noted at levels 3 and 4.
Because of dose modification, the hematologic toxicities were relatively infrequent in all courses, Grade 4 thrombocytopenia was experienced in only one course in level 4 (Table 2). Grade 3/4 neutropenia was seen in 90%and 86%of courses on level 3 and level 4, respectively.
Non-hematologic toxicity Non-hematologic toxicity was of minor importance in all patients. Grade 3 alopecia and nausea/vomiting were seen in two patients at levels 3 and 4.
Efficacy Sixteen of 17 patients achieved objective response with 4 CRs and 12 PRs with an overall response rate of 94%(95% Confidence Interval; 8 1.6% to 100%). The response duration was 223 days (range 79 to 121+ days), and overall survival was 375 days (range 132 to 1213+ days).

[SourceID: 8] Discussion
The age-specific incidence rate for lung cancer increases dramatically with age and specific treatment decisions must be made for elderly patient with lung cancer (9,10). Despite the documented potential for survival benefit with treatment, elderly patients are frequently excluded from clinical trials and there is no standard chemotherapy for elderly patients with SCLC. Shepherd et al (1) reported no significant differences between the three age groups aged 70 to 74, aged 75 to 80 and aged over 80 years. The survival of patients who received chemotherapy is significantly longer than that of untreated patients even though frequent dose reductions for toxicity may be required. The elderly patients who received chemotherapy experienced toxicity more frequent, especially myelosuppression than younger patients. Chemotherapywith oral etoposide was recommended for elderly patients at several phase II trials ( 1 1 , 12). On the contrary, Miller et al (13) compared three-day oral etoposide plus cisplatin with 21-day oral etoposide plus cisplatin. In their study, more toxicities especially nausea and appetite loss were experienced on 21-day oral etoposide plus cisplatin regimen although the two regimens had equivalent activity for SCLC. The combination of carboplatin and etoposide seems effective and less toxic than the combination of cisplatin and etoposide (6, 14 , 15). Carboplatin plus etoposide was generally used at a dose of 320 to 450 mg/m2 of carboplatin and 80 mg/m2 to 100 mg/m2 of intravenous etoposide for three days (16) but for elderly patients the carboplatin dosage was reduced to 150-300 mg/m2 (6,9,17). The renal clearance of anticancer agents is highly variable in elderly patients; this is one of the biggest problems for treatment ( 1 8, 19). Calvert' s carboplatin calculation dosage formula (20) is useful and simple but it includes glomerular filtration rate (GFR). GFRis often substituted by 24-hour creatinine clearance which necessitates hospitalization to measure and increases aberration in elderly patients. Chatelut's carboplatin calculation dosage formula is useful for elderly patients, as it excludes 24-hour creatinine clearance (7). This study has shown that the MTDwas reached at an AUC of 5.0 mg/ml#min by Chatelut's formula for carboplatin and etoposide 100 mg/m2of etoposide on days 1-3. DLTswere leukopenia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and neutropenic fever. In 17 elderly SCLCpatients, we observed encouraging 12 (71%) partial responses and 4 (23%) complete responses, with an overall response rate of 94%. For future phase II studies, the recommendeddoses are carboplatin at an AUCof 4.5 mg/ml»min on day 1 and etoposide 100 mg/m2 of etoposide on days 1-3 at 4-week intervals. Recent studies for LD-SCLCthat included thoracic irradiation, especially concurrent use reported superior response rates, time to progression, and overall survival rates (21). However, elderly patients over age 70 years or over age 75 years were excluded in such studies (22,23), and the meta-analysis performed by Pignon et al (24) did not demonstrate the benefit of chest irradiation for elderly patients over age 70 years. To confirm the efficacy of thoracic irradiation for elderly patients, a randomized study is needed.