[SourceID: 1] Untitled
Dose-®nding study of valspodar (PSC 833) with daunorubicin and cytarabine to reverse multidrug resistance in elderly patients with previously untreated acute myeloid leukemia Introduction Intrinsic or acquired resistance to chemotherapy remains a major obstacle to achieving long-term survival in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Standard induction therapy produces complete remission (CR) in 52 ± 72% of patients with de novo AML 1±8 depending on a variety of factors, including age of the patient, history of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), and cytogenetic and immunophenotypic pro®le. Lower response rates are observed in older patients 9±13 or in those with secondary AML or a history of MDS. 14 Overall median duration of remission is 8 ± 12 months, and median survival is 9 ± 16 months. Approximately 40% of patients who received intensive induction or consolidation therapy with high-dose cytarabine remain disease free at four years. 8,15,16 However, the bene®ts of intensive therapy have been con®ned primarily to younger patients (ie, 555 years of age).
One hypothesized reason for failure to respond to chemotherapy is the presence of multidrug resistance (MDR), a mechanism of resistance to structurally unrelated cytostatic agents. In AML, MDR is most frequently mediated through enhanced drug eux by P-glycoprotein (P-gp). 17,18 This 170-kd transmembrane glycoprotein is a member of the adenosine triphosphate-binding cassette (ABC) proteins 19,20 and is encoded by the multidrug resistance gene-1 (MDR-1). 21 ± 23 In cancer cells, P-gp is capable of extruding a wide variety of structurally unrelated drugs taken up through passive diusion, including daunorubicin (DNR), doxorubicin, idarubicin, mitoxantrone, etoposide, and vinca alkaloids that are frequently used for treating AML. 24 P-glycoprotein is also expressed in several normal tissues, such as CD34 + hematopoietic progenitor cells, biliary canaliculi, kidney tubules, and the blood-brain barrier. 18,25 Since 1989 several studies have reported the MDR-1 phenotype to be expressed in about 30 ± 50% of AML patients, depending on the technique and the threshold used, 26 ± 29 with a higher percentage in AML patients relapsing after or refractory to chemotherapy. 30 More recent studies by the Southwest Oncology Group (SWOG) indicate that the MDR-1 gene is expressed with extremely high frequency in elderly AML patients (ie, patients 455 years of age). As many as 80% of elderly patients with de novo AML present with a MDR phenotype as a result of P-gp expression; the frequency of P-gp expression is similar in both de novo and secondary disease. 31 The correlation between MDR-1 gene expression and treatment outcome in AML is well documented. 32 In most studies, MDR-1 expression was an adverse prognostic factor for achieving a CR. 33 ± 50 In elderly, newly diagnosed patients, the CR rate of strongly P-gp ± positive as compared to P-gp ± negative patients was recently found to be 31 vs 71%. 31 Finally, several recently published large studies have shown that MDR-1 expression, as well as secondary AML, CD34 positivity of leukemic blasts, unfavorable cytogenetics, and age were each, signi®cantly and independently, associated with lower CR rates in elderly patients. 36,49 ± 52 Phase I/II studies of cyclosporine A (CsA), combined with DNR in patients with relapsed/ refractory AML or with VAD (vincristine, doxorubicin, dexamethasone) in patients with multiple myeloma, have demonstrated the feasibility of CsA-mediated MDR reversal in vivo. 53 ± 55 Valspodar (PSC 833) is an analog of cyclosporine D, which is approximately 5 ± 30-fold more potent than CsA in vitro. 56 Unlike CsA, however, valspodar is neither immunosuppressive nor nephrotoxic. 56 ± 58 In fact, unlike CsA, which is a substrate for P-gp and appears to exert its modulatory eects by competitive inhibition, 59,60 valspodar is a high-anity, noncompetitive inhibitor of P-gp and is not appreciably transported by it. 61 In phase I/II trials, it was established that valspodar blood levels high enough to reverse MDR in resistant cell lines in vitro (1000 to 2000 ng/ml) 62 ± 64 could be achieved and were well tolerated. Finally, in hematological malignancies, MDR reversal by valspodar has been demonstrated in patients with VAD-resistant/refractory multiple myeloma. 34,65 Because P-gp has a physiological role in tissues normally responsible for the transport and excretion of cytotoxic drugs, treatment with P-gp inhibitors delays the elimination of other anticancer drugs. In phase I studies the dose-normalized area under the curve (AUC) increased by 61 ± 74% for doxorubicin and by 84% (mean values) for etoposide when these drugs were given in combination with valspodar. 62,66 This pharmacokinetic interaction therefore requires appropriate dose reduction of the cytotoxic drugs that are P-gp substrates, when used in association with valspodar, to continue to provide eective treatment without increasing toxicity. Herein we report the results of a phase I study to establish the maximum tolerated dose (MTD) of DNR, combined with ®xed doses of valspodar and cytarabine, in previously untreated, elderly AML patients.

[SourceID: 2] Methods
The study was an open, multicenter, multinational trial. The study protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Boards of the participating hospitals. All patients gave prior written informed consent.

[SourceID: 3] Patient population
The study population consisted of previously untreated patients 560 years of age, who had a cytopathologically con®rmed diagnosis of primary or secondary AML (M0 to M7) according to the French-American-British (FAB) classi®cation. Patients who had progressed from myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) were eligible if they had received no previous chemotherapy. Patients with a prior history of polycythemia rubra vera or primary myelo®brosis, or in blast cell crisis of chronic myeloid leukemia, were excluded. Other eligibility criteria included World Health Organization (WHO) performance status 42, life expectancy 512 weeks, and suitability for intensive chemotherapy in the opinion of the treating physician. Documented central nervous system involvement, left ventricular ejection fraction of 550% as measured by cardiac radionuclide-gated blood pool scan, serum creatinine 5175 mmol/l, serum bilirubin 52.5-fold the institutional upper limit of normal, positive hepatitis B surface antigen or a known history of hepatitis C or human immunode®ciency virus infection, known hypersensitivity to CsA, or prior treatment with cytotoxic agents and/or radiotherapy were all causes for exclusion. All patients received a central venous access catheter and were hospitalized until their granulocytes had recovered to 50.5610 9 cells/l.

[SourceID: 4] Schedule of chemotherapy and valspodar
All patients were planned to receive two identical induction cycles, irrespective of the response to the ®rst cycle. In each induction cycle, valspodar (which was supplied in a cremophor EL-based solution and was diluted in saline) was administered via continuous intravenous infusion (CIV) at a dose of 10 mg/kg/24 h on days 1 ± 4; on day 1, the infusion was started concomitantly with a loading dose of 2 mg/kg administered over 2 h. Cytarabine was administered CIV at a dose of 200 mg/m 2 /24 h on days 1 ± 7. Daunorubicin was administered as an intravenous (IV) bolus injection on days 1 ± 3: the starting dose (cohort 1) was 35 mg/m 2 . This dose was escalated in cohort 2 to 45 mg/m 2 . No further dose escalation of DNR was foreseen in the protocol. All patients who were in CR after the induction cycles received a single consolidation course consisting of etoposide at a dose of 80 mg/m 2 /day intravenous (IV), mitoxantrone at a dose of 6 mg/m 2 /day IV, and cytarabine (1.0 g/m 2 )a sa 6-h infusion on days 1 ± 4. Valspodar was not administered during the consolidation course.

[SourceID: 5] Determination of maximum tolerated dose and dose-limiting toxicities
The primary objective of the study was to determine the MTD of DNR combined with a ®xed dose of valspodar and cytarabine. Two doses of DNR were evaluated: 35 mg/m 2 /day (cohort 1) and 45 mg/m 2 /day (cohort 2). Dose escalation was allowed if the observed dose-limiting toxicity (DLT) rate in cohort 1 was 525%; dose reduction was necessary if the observed DLT rate was 440%. The decision to escalate (or reduce) the DNR dose in the next cohort was based on the safety pro®le of the ®rst 16 evaluable patients. However, accrual on the ongoing dose was continued until the next cohort was open, thus allowing for more than 16 patients to be enrolled in each cohort.
Dose-limiting toxicities were de®ned as: (1) neutropenia (absolute neutrophil count [ANC] 50.5610 9 cells/l or thrombocytopenia (550610 9 platelets/l) in the absence of AML for 48 weeks after the start of treatment cycle 1; (2) death during or after treatment in cycle 1 without recovery of blood cell counts (ANC 50.5610 9 cells/l and platelets 550610 9 /l) or hypoplasia without evidence of persistent AML; and (3) any Common Toxicity Criteria (CTC) grade 3/4 nonhematologic toxicity except nausea, alopecia, cerebellar ataxia, hyperbilirubinemia lasting 420 days, or infection responsive to antibiotic treatment.

[SourceID: 6] Response criteria and treatment outcome
Complete remission was de®ned as: (1) a normal marrow cellularity (ie, 420%) with 55% blasts and no Auer rods; (2) no evidence of extramedullary leukemia; and (3) recovery of peripheral blood neutrophils to at least 1500 cells/ml and platelets to at least 100 000/ml (all persisting for at least 28 days).
Treatment failure was de®ned as: (1) absolute drug resistance with failure to achieve a reduction of the leukemic in®ltration in the marrow that would meet the criteria of CR, or persistent leukemia in the peripheral blood, or persistent extramedullary disease;
(2) regeneration failure with persistent hypoplasia for more than 40 days after completion of induction therapy; or (3) aplastic death: death during hypoplasia without signs of persistent leukemia. The overall survival was calculated from start of treatment until the date of death. The frequencies of excessive toxicities, infections, and hemorrhages were evaluated separately.

[SourceID: 7] Pharmacokinetic analyses
Measurements of valspodar blood levels were performed to determine that the concentration of valspodar was within the range of maximal in vitro P-gp inhibition. Blood samples (2 ml) were drawn before starting valspodar infusion on days 1 ± 4. The samples were stored in EDTA-coated tubes at 7208C. The valspodar concentration in whole blood was determined using a radioimmunoassay (RIA) as previously published. 67 Samples for measurement of plasma concentrations of DNR and the hydroxylated metabolite DNR-ol were taken on day 3 of cycle 1, just before, just after, and at 4, 24, and 48 h after DNR administration. Blood samples (5 ml) were drawn into heparinized tubes and centrifuged as soon as possible, and the plasma was immediately transferred into uncoated polypropylene tubes and deep frozen at 7208C. Plasma levels of DNR and DNR-ol were evaluated by high-performance liquid chromatography as previously described. 68 Plasma AUC of DNR and DNR-ol up to the last measurable sampling time point (AUC last ) was calculated by the log-linear trapezoidal method. The terminal half-life was assessed by linear regression to the log-concentration-time plot and AUC from time zero to in®nity was determined by the formula AUC inf =AUC last +C (last)/(0.693/t ). The AUC inf was corrected for carry-over from the two previous doses by AUC inf,corr =AUC inf ± C(0h)/0.693/t ). This correction of AUC allowed for a comparison to literature values.

[SourceID: 8] Determination of P-gp expression and function
At diagnosis, and after informed consent was given, bone marrow aspirates were obtained from the sternum or the posterior iliac crest. Marrow samples (3 ml) were collected into 10-ml tubes containing 5000 International units (IU) of heparin in 2 ml of DMEM (Gibco BRL, Paisley, UK), cooled to between 08Ca n d 48C, and shipped on ice overnight to the central laboratory. Mononuclear bone marrow cells were collected by centrifugation over Lymphoprep (Nycomed, Oslo, Norway), and suspended at a concentration of 4610 9 cells/ml in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum and gentamycin.
For measurement of P-gp expression, cells were incubated at room temperature with a monoclonal antibody against P-gp, either MRK16 (Kamiya Biomedical Company, Tukwila, USA) at a concentration of 10 mg/ml or UIC-2 (Immunotech, Marseille, France) at a concentration of 12.5 mg/ml, or a matching aspeci®c isotype control antibody mouse IgG2a (Sigma) at a concentration of 10 mg/ml. Cellbound antibodies were detected by isothiocyanate (FITC)-labeled rabbit antimouse immunoglobulin antibodies (DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark). Cells were incubated with 7-aminoactinomycin (7-AAD, Sigma) to exclude nonviable cells. Fluorescence was measured using a FACScalibur (Becton and Dickinson, San Jose, USA). The results are expressed as the ratio of cellassociated ¯uorescence of cells incubated with the anti ± P-gp antibody to the mean of cell-associated ¯uorescence of cells incubated with the matching aspeci®c control antibody. 40 For measurement of P-gp function, cells were incubated for 1 h at 378Ca t5 %C O 2 in the absence or presence of 2 mM valspodar. After this incubation, 2 ng/ml rhodamin-123 (Rho) obtained from Sigma (St Louis, USA) was added to the cells. A sample was taken at time 0 to correct for background ¯uorescence and after 75 min to measure intracellular Rho accumulation. Cells were incubated with 7-AAD to exclude nonviable cells. Fluorescence was measured using a FACScalibur. Results are given as the ratio of the mean intracellular Rho ¯uorescence of cells exposed to valspodar to the mean intracellular ¯uorescence of cells not exposed.
The drug-sensitive cell line RMPI 8226 S and the drug-resistant variant 8226 D6, kindly provided by Dr W Dalton (Lee Mot Cancer Centre, Tampa, USA), were used as controls in each experiment. Based on all control tests run to measure P-gp function, the mean+s.d. ratio of Rho ¯uorescence of the 8226 S was 0.90+0.04 and of the 8226 D6 13.80+7.48. For Pgp expression, the mean MRK16/ IgG2a ratio or UIC-2/IgG2a ratio of the negative controls, of ie the 8226 S cell line, was 1.25+0.29 or 1.24+0.26 respectively; the mean ¯uorescence ratio of the positive controls, ie the 8226 D6 cell line, with MRK16 or UIC-2 were 34.05+4.00 and 36.18+4.00 respectively. Patient bone marrow samples were considered positive for P-gp function when the ratio of Rho ¯uorescence was 41.05, this value representing a signi®cantly higher ratio than that observed with 8226 S (P50.05, 2-sided t-test). Patient samples were considered positive for P-gp expression if the ratio of P-gp ¯uorescence was 41.50 (P50.05, 2-sided t-test).

[SourceID: 9] Statistical methods
The association between response to treatment and P-gp expression was described by Kendall's correlation coecient. This coecient was also used to assess a possible correlation between the AUC of DNR and the occurrence of a DLT. Overall survival distributions were analysed descriptively by cohort using the Kaplan-Meier estimation method, and median survival times were derived.

[SourceID: 10] Results
From March 1996 to March 1999, 39 patients with de novo AML were accrued into the study at 15 centers in ®ve countries. The median age was 67 years (range, 60 ± 83 years); other baseline characteristics are summarized in Table 1. The majority of patients (80%) had newly diagnosed AML, and 20% of patients had a prior MDS. The most common subtype was FAB M2 disease (33%), and 41% of patients had M4 disease or higher. The majority of patients (74%) had WHO performance status 41. Among 34 patients with viable bone marrow samples at baseline who were evaluable for P-gp expression and function, 24 (70%) patients were P-gp positive by either immunohistochemical reactivity with the MRK16 antibody or by measurement of P-gp activity as measured by the Rho retention assay. Ten evaluable patients were clearly P-gp negative at baseline by both assays.
The ®rst 19 patients were treated with 35 mg/m 2 DNR (cohort 1), and in the next 20 patients, the dose of DNR was escalated to 45 mg/m 2 (cohort 2). A total of 27 (69%) patients discontinued during the study, 16 due to death, three due to adverse events, seven due to treatment failure, and one due to inability to tolerate further treatment.

[SourceID: 11] Safety
The incidence of DLT was 525% in cohort 1, therefore, the planned DNR dose escalation was carried out. In cohort 2, a high rate of DLTs and toxic deaths suggested that 35 mg/m 2 DNR was the MTD in combination with valspodar.
In cohort 1, four of 19 (21%) patients experienced a nonhematologic protocol-speci®ed DLT during the ®rst induction cycle (Table 2): CTC grade 3 mucositis, grade 3 hypotension, cardiac arrhythmia, and myocardial infarction (one patient each). None of these was fatal. The myocardial infarction occurred in a patient with pre-existing active coronary heart disease. There were seven deaths in cohort 1 (six deaths during cycle 1 and one death during cycle 2); six deaths occurred within 30 days of the start of treatment. Three patients died while in aplasia, and three patients died with leukemic re-growth. The cause of death was one of the following: gastrointestinal bleeding, septic shock, pneumonia, pulmonary embolism, or concomitant bronchopneumopathy. Ten patients were treated on the second induction cycle: one of these patients died with persistent leukemia before day 30 of the second cycle. One patient developed grade 3 mucositis during cycle 2.
In cohort 2, six of 20 (30%) patients experienced a protocol-speci®ed DLT during the ®rst cycle (Table 2). Three patients developed grade 3 mucositis, one patient each had a fatal cardiac arrhythmia and cardiac arrest, and one patient had a grade 3 rash. In addition, one patient developed during cycle 1 a grade 4 hyperbilirubinemia that persisted 420 days and thus ful®lled the protocol criteria for a DLT, yet was deemed secondary to persisting AML documented at day 22. A total of ®ve patients died during cycle 1, four in the aplastic phase before day 30 of the cycle from either cerebral hemorrhage, pulmonary hemorrhage, septic shock, or rapid disease progression. Twelve patients in cohort 2 received a second induction cycle: ®ve of these patients died either from sepsis (n=3), pneumonia (n=1), or cerebral hemorrhage (n=1). Four of the patients who died during the second induction cycle had achieved CR after the ®rst cycle, the ®fth patient had persistent leukemia and died on day 37. One patient had grade 4 hyperbilirubinemia, and four patients had grade 3 mucositis following cytotoxic treatment in cycle 2.
Fever, nausea, hypokalemia, and peripheral edema and were the most frequently observed nonhematologic toxicities in both cohorts (Table 3). The DLT of valspodar is cerebellar ataxia, which is transient and fully reversible. In this trial, 10 (26%) patients experiencing grade 1/2 ataxia, and three (8%) patients experienced grade 3 ataxia or cerebellar syndrome, which usually occurred between days 3 and 4 of valspodar administration. No patient experienced grade 4 ataxia. One patient had a dose reduction of valspodar to 7.5 mg/kg/day as a result of grade 3 cerebellar syndrome.
The incidence of hematologic toxicity was as expected with conventional anthracycline-based remission induction schedules in elderly patients. Only 46% of patients were assessable for neutrophil recovery. The median time to neutrophil recovery (ANC 50.5610 9 cells/l) in assessable patients was approximately 31 days (range, 21 ± 48 days) and was similar in both cohorts following cycles 1, 2, and 3. During cycle 1, all assessable patients recovered by day 56, the maximum number of days allowed per protocol. Similarly, 92% of patients developed grade 4 thrombocytopenia; however, recovery was complete by day 56 in all assessable patients. The incidence of grade 3/4 bleeding events was higher in cohort 2 (20%) than in cohort 1 (5%).

[SourceID: 12] Response and survival
Eight of 19 (42%) patients in cohort 1 and 11 of 20 (55%) patients in cohort 2 achieved a CR for an overall response rate of 49% (Table 4). The majority of responding patients achieved a CR after 1 cycle of therapy. There were 13 treatment failures as a result of absolute or relative resistance: eight in cohort 1, and ®ve in cohort 2. In cohort 1, early death (ie, within 30 days of the beginning of chemotherapy of either induction cycle) occurred in seven patients, compared with 10 patients in cohort 2, four of whom were in CR after cycle 1.  The Hematology Journal
The median overall survival was 333 days in cohort 1 compared with 98 days in cohort 2 (Figure 1). The majority of patients died of progressive disease; however, the incidence of toxic deaths, primarily as a result of sepsis, was greater in cohort 2. The 6-, 9-, and 12-month survival rates were consistently higher in cohort 1 compared with cohort 2.

[SourceID: 13] P-gp Expression
Among 34 patients evaluable for P-gp expression and function, 24 (70%) patients were positive for either Pgp expression or function (ie, bone marrow blasts were either positive for P-gp expression by ¯ow cytometry using the MRK16 antibody or demonstrated P-gp activity by the Rho retention assay). Of these 24 P-gp ± positive patients, 11 (46%) achieved a CR (Table 5). In 10 of these 24 patients, MRK16 reactivity and P-gp functional assays were discordant (ie, four patients were MRK16 + /Rho 7 and six patients were MRK16 7 / Rho + ). Ten patients were negative for P-gp expression and function: of these, six (60%) achieved a CR. The CR rate was not signi®cantly dierent in P-gp ± positive compared with P-gp ± negative patients. Furthermore, analysis based on Kendall's correlation coecient demonstrated no correlation between response to treatment and P-gp expression or function. Among the 13 patients with absolute resistance (ie, treatment failures), three patients were P-gp positive, three patients were P-gp negative, and four were MRK16 + / Rho 7 .

[SourceID: 14] Pharmacokinetics
Repeated daily measurements of blood concentrations of valspodar were taken in 34 patients. One patient, however, was excluded from the pharmacodynamic analysis because he only received one-tenth of the planned valspodar dose. Daily blood concentrations of valspodar are shown in Figure 2. The median whole blood concentration during the continuous infusion of valspodar was approximately 2200 ng/ml (range, 778 ±   Table 5 P-glycoprotein expression and function and clinical response in relation to P-gp expression No. Patients CR No CR P-glycoprotein positive (MRK16 + or Rho + )2 4 1 11 3 MRK16 + , Rho + 12 8 4 MRK16 + , Rho ± 41 3 MRK16 ± , Rho + 61 5 MRK16 + , Rho not assessable 2 1 1 P-glycoprotein negative (MRK16 ± and Rho ± )1 0 6 4 Unassessable 5 2 3 Total 39 19 20 MRK16 + indicates positive for staining with the MRK16 antibody; Rho + indicates a positive P-gp functional rhodamine 123 cellular retention assay.

[SourceID: 15] The Hematology Journal
Valspodar dosage in acute myeloid leukemia PS o n n e v e l det al 9394 ng/ml). With very few exceptions, all patients showed valspodar blood levels 41000 ng/ml at all time points. The four patients showing grade 2/3 cerebellar toxicity had mean peak valspodar blood concentrations similar to those with grade 1 or no cerebellar toxicity (4680+1316 ng/ml vs 5254+3733 ng/ml, n=26).
Mean plasma concentrations of DNR and DNR-ol were nearly the same in cohort 1 and cohort 2 despite a 29% dose increase in cohort 2. The mean plasma 48-h AUCs for DNR was 2.26+1.67 mMÁh in cohort 1 (n=15) compared with 2.02+1.00 mMÁh in cohort 2 (n=16). The mean plasma 48-h AUC for the hydroxyl metabolite DNR-ol was 17.7+6.4 mMÁh in cohort 1 vs 19.9+6.2 mMÁh in cohort 2. When extrapolated to in®nity and corrected for carry-over from previous doses the mean AUCs for DNR in cohorts 1 and 2 were 2.57+1.85 and 2.29+1.13 mMÁh, respectively. The terminal plasma half-life of DNR was 51.3+25.9 h in cohort 1 and 68.6+47.7 h in cohort 2, thus considerably longer than the 15 ± 47 h reported in the literature when DNR is given without valspodar. 69 ± 74 No signi®cant correlation was found between the plasma AUC of DNR and DLT. Kendall's correlation coecient was 0.12. Further, no signi®cant correlation between the observed response to treatment and the DNR AUC was apparent (Figure 3).
The study design did not allow for a comparison of the anthracycline PK with and without valspodar. During the ®rst 4 h after administration, the pharmacokinetic pro®le of DNR in combination with valspodar in this trial is comparable to that observed with the 45-mg/m 2 dose of DNR alone in elderly AML patients in a previous trial 75 (Figure 4) (ie, peak levels were comparable). However, due to the prolonged terminal half-life, DNR persisted in plasma for a longer period of time and hence resulted in an increase in AUC inf when compared to literature values for DNR given without valspodar. 68,70 ± 74 For doses of 45 ± 75 mg/ m 2 /d, mean AUCs in the range of 0.57 ± 1.97 mMÁh have been reported. The AUC inf values of the present study were higher than all the reported values and it is estimated that a DNR dose of 90 ± 120 mg/m 2 /d given without valspodar would be needed in order to achieve similar AUCs.

[SourceID: 16] Discussion
Resistance to combination chemotherapy is a major obstacle to improving remission rates and survival in AML. Unlike many other tumors, in which MDR is often acquired during therapy, many untreated AML patients exhibit P-gp ± related MDR at diagnosis. Several independent studies have found that P-gp expression is an unfavorable prognostic factor for response and/or survival. Reversal of the MDR phenotype by blockade of P-gp oers a possible route to overcome MDR. Several trials have attempted to demonstrate MDR reversal in AML patients using a Pgp modulator. However, most of these trials have been inconclusive because they failed to achieve blood levels of the P-gp modulator high enough to reverse drug resistance and/or they included patients whose tumor cells possessed other mechanisms of resistance in addition to P-gp expression. Therefore, previously untreated, elderly AML patients in whom only P-gp expression has been shown to be predictive of clinical outcome 50 provide a good model for investigating the clinical utility of P-gp modulators.
Because inhibition of P-pg alters the PK of concurrently administered cytostatic agents that are substrates for P-gp, including DNR, the dose of these chemotherapy agents must be reduced to avoid doselimiting toxicity. The primary goal of this study was to establish the optimal dose of DNR when administered concomitantly with a dose of valspodar that can fully reverse MDR. Cytarabine is not transported by P-gp; therefore, the dose of this drug was left unchanged. The dose of DNR used in protocols for elderly AML patients has varied greatly; however, 45 mg/m 2 is a fairly typical standard dose. 12,76,77 In the present study a reduced dose of 35 mg/m 2 was chosen as the starting  The Hematology Journal Cooperative Group (EORTC-LCG) and the Dutch Hematology-Oncology Cooperative Group (HO-VON). 77 In that study, the median time to hematologic recovery was 25 days in responding patients. The median time to recovery observed in the present study (ie, 31 days) was slightly longer compared with the previous experience with this regimen. The longer hematologic recovery time may have been due to the eect of valspodar on undierentiated CD34 + hematopoietic cells, which express functional P-gp in the cell membrane, thus making them more sensitive to the cytotoxic eects of DNR. However, these data have to be interpreted with caution because only 46% of patients were assessable for ANC recovery.
The results of this trial established 35 mg/m 2 DNR as the MTD when administered concurrently with 10 mg/kg/day valspodar. This dose of valspodar yielded blood concentrations that have been shown to eectively reverse MDR (ie, median blood level 52000 ng/ml) 62 ± 64 over four days and was associated with a low incidence of grade 3/4 toxicities. Severe ataxia and hyperbilirubinemia occurred in 410% of patients. In the absence of a dose relationship, the speci®c contributions of valspodar and chemotherapy to the occurrence of cardiac arrhythmias remain unclear. In general, the toxicity pro®le observed when valspodar was added to 35 mg/m 2 DNR did not dier from that normally observed in elderly AML patients treated with an anthracycline-based induction chemotherapy regimen. Although the toxicity pro®les of the two cohorts did not dier dramatically, cohort 1 had a consistently more favorable pro®le than cohort 2. In cohort 1 (35 mg/m 2 DNR), 10 of 19 (53%) patients completed a second induction cycle, and a total of seven deaths occurred over 30 cycles, mostly due to disease progression. Only three deaths in cohort 1 were a result of fatal infections or hemorrhage precipitated by hematologic toxicity. In contrast, at the higher dose level of DNR (ie, 45 mg/m 2 ), 10 deaths occurred over 31 cycles, and seven deaths could be attributed to treatment-related toxicity, including the death of four patients who had achieved a CR after the ®rst cycle. This increase in treatment-related mortality at the higher DNR dose level may have been related to increased DNR exposure as a result of the interaction with valspodar. Furthermore, there was a higher incidence of grade 3/4 mucositis and bleeding events in cohort 2.
The CR rates were 42% in cohort 1 and 55% in cohort 2, and the majority (14 of 19) of patients entered CR after only one treatment cycle, which may be an important bene®t for elderly patients. Although the number of patients included in this study is relatively small, the overall survival analysis clearly shows an advantage for the patients treated with the lower dose of DNR. Most encouraging was the observation that the CR rate did not dier in P-gp ± positive compared with P-gp ± negative patients, suggesting that valspodar eectively reversed MDR in the group of P-gp ± positive patients who would ordinarily be expected to have a substantially lower CR rate compared with comparable patients with a P-gp ± negative phenotype. Interestingly, four patients had negative functional tests although P-gp was present in the cell membrane as demonstrated by MRK16 staining. Nevertheless, only one of these patients achieved CR, suggesting the possible involvement of other functional mechanisms of drug resistance. Despite the relatively small number of patients included in this study, these results suggest that the adverse impact of P-gp on treatment outcome in patients with P-gp ±positive AML blasts may be overcome by treating these patients with induction chemotherapy plus valspodar.
No relationship was found between the plasma concentration of the DNR or DNR-ol and the response to treatment. This is in agreement with the previous observation that no plasma DNR or DNR-ol PK parameter is predictive of the clinical outcome of therapy in de novo AML and ALL. 75,78 Galletis et al. found that intracellular DNR concentrations may be a better predictor for clinical outcome. 78 Although the dose of DNR was increased by 29% in cohort 2, there was no dierence in the AUC between cohorts. The AUC of DNR in this study was consistent with a theoretical DNR dose of 90 ± 120 mg/m 2 without valspodar, but this high AUC did not translate into increased toxicity. The interpretation of these ®ndings is unclear, but it is dicult to draw de®nitive conclusions because of the large inter-patient variability in the DNR AUC.
In conclusion, the results of this study suggest that substantial inhibition of P-gp can be achieved in vivo at clinically tolerable doses of both valspodar and DNR. The feasibility of administering valspodar to elderly patients with untreated AML at a safe and welltolerated dose of DNR has been established. The higher than expected response rate of P-gp ± positive patients suggests that valspodar, at the dose used in this study, may reverse MDR. However, phase III randomized trials are needed to determine if this approach will ultimately bene®t patients. The 35-mg/ m 2 dose of DNR has been recommended for further study. A series of randomized phase III trials of valspodar in dierent subsets of AML are ongoing, and the results will be available in the near future.