[SourceID: 1] Untitled
Rotterdam, Groene Hilledijk 301, 3075 EA Rotterdam, The Netherlands 1995; Miller et al, 1995), head and neck cancer (Catimel et al,  1994), gastric cancer (Sulkes et al, 1994), melanoma (Aamdal et al, 1994), soft tissue sarcoma (Van Hoesel et al, 1994) and pancreatic cancer (De Fomi et al, 1994). The most important side-effect was an early and short-lasting neutropenia, which in 20% of the patients was complicated by infection (Pronk et al, 1995). Alopecia was a common side-effect and usually universal. Gastrointestinal side- effects such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea and mucositis were mild and easily treated. Other side-effects included asthenia, infrequent hypersensitivity reactions, skin reactions, nail changes, mild sensory neuropathy and fluid retention. The application of premedication consisting of corticosteroids has markedly reduced the inci- dence of hypersensitivity reactions (Schrijvers et al, 1993) and seems to decrease the severity of fluid retention (Piccart et al,  1994). Therefore, most studies on docetaxel are now performed with standard corticosteroid premedication.
Ifosfamide is an alkylating drug that among others has shown to be active against non-small-cell lung cancer (Ettinger, 1989), testicular cancer (Kaye et al, 1995), breast cancer (Hoffmann et al, 1990) and soft tissue sarcoma (Pinedo et al, 1986). The main side- effects of ifosfamide consist of urotoxicity, nephrotoxicity, neuro- toxicity, myelosuppression, nausea, vomiting' and alopecia. Ifosfamide can be administered orally or intravenously as a bolus or as a continuous infusion over 1-5 days. Standard single-agent doses range between 5 and 10 g m-2. In the present study, Ifosfamide was given as a continuous 24-h infusion for the patient's convenience. The combination of these two drugs could be of major interest in tumours in which they are both effective.
This phase I study on the combination of docetaxel and ifosfamide was performed with the following objectives: (a) to determine the maximum tolerated dose (MTD); (b) to characterize the toxic effects: (c) to determine the optimal drug administration sequence; (d) to propose a dose and sequence for further phase II studies; (e) to report any anti-tumour effect of the docetaxel-ifosfamide combina- tion; and (f) to describe pharmacokinetics of both drugs in this particular combination. The results of the last topic will be published elsewhere. Rowinsky et al (1991) demonstrated the importance and potential relevance of drug sequence and therefore sequence investi- gations should be integrated in all phase I studies involving combi- nations of drugs.

[SourceID: 2] PATIENTS AND METHODS Eligibility
Only patients with a histologically confirmed solid tumour for which no therapies with greater potential benefit than docetaxel and ifosfamide existed were candidates for this study. Eligibility criteria included: (a) age 2 18 years and < 75 years; (b) WHO performance status 0-2; (c) no more than one line of previous chemotherapy for advanced disease, previous (neo) adjuvant chemotherapy was allowed provided that this chemotherapy had ended at least 6 months before study entry; (d) no previous anti- cancer therapy for more than 4 weeks (6 weeks in cases of nitrosureas, mitomycin C and carboplatin); (e) no previous treatment with docetaxel, ifosfamide or paclitaxel; (f) no previous radiotherapy for at least 4 weeks (8 weeks in cases of extensive previous radiotherapy); (g) adequate bone marrow (neutrophils 2 2 x 109 1-1, platelets 2 100 x 109 1-', hepatic (total bilirubin < 1.25 times the upper-normal limits, ASAT (SGOT) < 2 times and in case of proven liver metastases < 3 times the upper-normal limits) and renal function (serum creatinine < 120,mol 1-1); (h) absence of symptomatic peripheral neuropathy 2 grade 2 according to NCI Common Toxicity Criteria (CTC) (Brundage et al, 1993); and (i) no peptic ulcer, unstable diabetes mellitus or other contra- indications for the use of corticosteroids. All patients had to give written informed consent.

[SourceID: 3] Drug administration
Docetaxel (Taxotere-RP 56976) was supplied by Rh8ne-Poulenc Rorer (Antony, France) as a concentrated sterile solution containing 40 mg ml-' = 80 mg per 2 ml per vial in polysorbate 80 (Tween 80). The appropriate amount of the drug to be adminis- tered to the patient was diluted in 5% dextrose or 0.9% saline solu- tion so that the maximum docetaxel concentration was 1 mg ml-'. The drug was administered to the patient as a 1-h i.v. infusion.
Ifosfamide (ASTA, Degussa, Frankfurt, Germany) was diluted in a 3-1 dextrose saline solution plus mesna and administered to the patient as a 24-h i.v. continuous infusion. Treatment cycles were repeated every 3 weeks.

[SourceID: 4] Routine comedication
All patients received 32 mg of methylprednisolone or 8 mg of dexamethasone orally 12 and 3 h before docetaxel infusion and then 12 and 24 h after the end of docetaxel infusion, followed by either 32 mg or 8 mg twice daily for an additional 3 days to prevent the onset of hypersensitivity reactions and to reduce and/or delay the occurrence of skin toxicity and/or fluid retention related to docetaxel. Prophylactic co-medication with mesna was given to all patients to prevent urotoxicity induced by ifosfamide. The mesna dose was adapted according to the ifosfamide dose and was fractionated in an i.v. bolus of 20% of the corresponding ifosfamide dose given just before ifosfamide administration, 50% of the dose given concomitantly with the ifosfamide solution and 20% of the dose in a 2-1 dextrose saline solution given as a 12 h infusion after the end of ifosfamide administration.
All patients received prophylactic i.v. antiemetic medication with a 5-HT3 antagonist in a dose of either 8 mg of ondansetron, 5 mg of tropisetron or 3 mg of granisetron, just before the first cytotoxic drug administration and then once a day orally during the two following days in the same dose.

[SourceID: 5] Dosage
The docetaxel and ifosfamide doses were escalated according to a pre-established schedule and according to the toxicities observed at the previous dose level, after a minimum of three patients had tolerated the previous dose. Toxicities were graded according to the NCI Common Toxicity Criteria (CTC) (Brundage et al, 1993). Once a patient in a given dose level developed side-effects of CTC 2 grade 3, other than myelosuppression, an additional three patients were entered at the same dose level. Dose-limiting toxi- city (DLT) was defined as CTC 2 grade 3 toxicity (excluding myelotoxicity) observed in 2 three patients at a given dose level. For myelosuppression DLT was defined as: (a) granulocytes < 0.5 x 109 1-1 for > 7 days; (b) granulocytes < 1.0 x 109 1-with fever 2 380C lasting > 3 days; (c) platelets < 25 x 109 1-'; and (d) infections 2 grade 3 requiring hospitalization.
The maximum tolerated dose (MTD) was defined as the dose level at which at least three out of six patients developed the same dose limiting toxicity. In this study MTDs could be determined for both drug sequences.
The following dose levels of docetaxel/fosfamide were explored: level I 60 mg m-2/2.5 g-' m-2; level II, 75 mg m-2/2.5 g m-2; level III, 75 mg m-2/3.0 g-' m-2; level IV, 75 mg m-2/4.0 g-I m-2; level V, 75 mg m-2/5.0 g-I m-2; level VI, 85 mg m-2/5.0 g-' m-2; level VII, 100 mg m-2/5 g-I m-2. British Journal of Cancer (1998) 77(1), 153-158   . ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~iv .
t 4 h
Drug sequence Dose escalation was initially performed with docetaxel preceding ifosfamide (schedule A) with a 1-h interval between the end of docetaxel infusion and the start of ifosfamide (Figure 1). When the MTD and doses to be used for further phase II studies were determined for schedule A, the dose level just below the MTD was reassessed with ifosfamide preceding docetaxel (schedule B). In this schedule there is a 24-h interval between the end of ifosfamide infusion and the start of docetaxel infusion. When the toxicities in this schedule were acceptable, further dose escalation was pursued.

[SourceID: 6] Pretreatment and follow-up studies
Before the start of treatment medical history was taken and phys- ical examination including neurological examination, laboratory studies, ECG, chest radiograph and if appropriate computerized tomography (CT) scan were performed. Laboratory studies included a complete blood count, differential white blood cell (WBC) count, sodium, potassium, chloride, bicarbonate, creatinine, urea, magnesium, calcium, total protein, albumin, alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin, gamma-glutamyltransferase (y-GT), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), aspartate transami- nase (ASAT) (SGOT), alanine transaminase (ALAT) (SGPT), glucose, uric acid and urinalysis.
History, physical examination, toxicity scoring (according to NCI CTC) (Brundage et al, 1993) were performed every 3 weeks and laboratory studies weekly. Complete blood counts were performed every week and every 2 days in case of febrile neutropenia. Urinalysis was performed before, during and after ifosfamide administration in every cycle. Every 3 weeks ECG was repeated. Chest radiographs and formal tumour assessments were performed after every two courses of chemotherapy. Standard WHO response criteria (WHO Handbook 1979) were used.

[SourceID: 7] RESULTS
Thirty-four patients were entered in this study. Patients character- istics are given in Table 1. All patients were evaluable for toxicity and tumour response.
Table 2 represents the dose level studied, the number of patients at each dose level and the number of evaluable courses at each dose level. Fifteen patients were treated at more than one dose level because of dose reduction because of various toxicities. Ten of these fifteen patients underwent dose reduction after the first treatment cycle because of neutropenic fever. The other five patients under- went dose reduction after two or more courses. Two patients at dose level VIA underwent three and four dose reductions respectively. The number between brackets represents the number of patients who were initially treated at a higher dose level and underwent dose reduction. A total of 155 courses were assessable for toxicity. No dose-limiting toxicities were observed for cycle 1 in dose levels IA and IIA. Serious toxicities were reported in cycle 1 at the following dose levels: febrile neutropenia at dose levels IIIA-VIA and IVB; diarrhoea grade 4 at dose level VA; and vomiting grade 3 at dose level IVB. A septic death was reported at dose level VA.

[SourceID: 8] Haematological toxicity
Table 3 represents the relevant haematological toxicities.
Granulocytopenia grades 3 and 4 were observed at all dose levels in 89% of courses and appeared to be ifosfamide dose-dependent. *Patients initially treated at a higher dose level.
In schedule A, febrile neutropenia associated with hospital admis- sion occurred in 15% of courses of which only one course was associated with sepsis. The granulocyte nadir was normally observed between days 8 and 11 of the course and lasted less than 7 days. Severe anaemia grades 3 and 4 were only documented in 6% of the courses. Thrombocytopenia grades 1 and 2 were observed at all dose levels but grades 3 and 4 were not reported.
In schedule B, granulocytopenia grades 3 and 4 were docu- mented in 77% of the courses. Febrile neutropenia occurred in 18% of the courses, whereas only two courses were complicated by sepsis. Severe anaemia and thrombocytopenia grades 3 and 4 were uncommon.

[SourceID: 9] Non-haematological toxicity
The most common non-haematological toxicities are shown in Table 4. Alopecia was common and occurred at all dose levels. Nausea and vomiting were usually mild and were reported in 41% and 25% of courses respectively. In schedule B grade 3 vomiting British Journal of Cancer (1998) 77(1), 153-158 0 Cancer Research Campaign 1998 RESPONSES A histologically proven complete response (CR) was achieved in a patient with a soft tissue sarcoma treated at dose level II. Partial responses were observed in cancer of unknown primary and in non-small-cell lung cancer, one patient each.

[SourceID: 10] DISCUSSION
Docetaxel is a new antimicrotubule agent that has already demonstrated activity in a wide variety of solid tumours and was registered for use in advanced breast cancer in 1995. Ifosfamide is an alkylating agent that is active when administered orally in nonsmall-cell lung cancer, testicular cancer, breast cancer and sarcoma. Because of the partly overlapping toxicity profiles and their activity against a wide range of solid tumours it was considered of interest to pursue a combination regimen of these two drugs. This phase I study was performed to assess the feasibility of the combination, to determine the MTD and the side-effects and to evaluate if toxicity is drug sequence dependent.
No phase I studies on the combination docetaxel-ifosfamide had been performed previously. The major toxicity of the combi- nation was granulocytopenia grades 3 and 4, which occurred in 89% of all courses and appeared to be ifosfamide dose dependent. Neutropenia grade 4 associated with fever occurred in 17% of all courses and was more common at the highest dose levels. The DLT for schedule A was neutropenic fever at a dose of 85 mg m-2 of docetaxel and 5 g m-2 of ifosfamide (dose level VIA). The DLT for schedule B was neutropenic fever at a dose level of 75 mg m-2 of docetaxel and 4 g m-2 of ifosfamide (dose level IVB), which was the initial dose tested. This observation cannot be explained by a difference in haematological toxicity between schedule A and B or by a difference in patient selection. As this made clear that there was no obvious advantage of this schedule compared with schedule A, no further patients have been studied.
The most common non-haematological toxicities were nausea, vomiting, mucositis and diarrhoea, most of them being mild. Schedule B appeared to induce more gastrointestinal toxicity than schedule A, for which no explanation can be given. In 19 out of 34 evaluable patients (56%) the docetaxel-ifosfamide combination induced a sensory neuropathy grade 1-2, whereas no neurocortical toxicity was observed. The incidence of sensory neuropathy of the combination was slightly higher than the incidence reported for docetaxel as a single agent (49%) (Hilkens et al, 1996). In a phase I study combining paclitaxel and cisplatin (Rowinsky et al, 1991)   and in a phase I study on the docetaxel-cisplatin combination (Hilkens et al, 1997; Pronk et al, 1997), the incidence of sensory neuropathy of the combination was higher than that reported for docetaxel as a single agent (Hilkens et al, 1996). It was suggested that these agents act synergistically in producing neurotoxicity.
The incidence of docetaxel related toxicities such as hypersensitivity reactions, nail and skin toxicity and oedema was relatively low and never a reason for treatment discontinuation. In this study, all patients received premedication consisting of dexamethasone or methylprednisolone, which might account for the low incidence of the above-mentioned side-effects.
Anti-tumour responses were seen in a variety of tumour types at all dose levels. Of note, was the histologically proven complete response in a patient with soft tissue sarcoma.
Based upon the data obtained in this phase I study the recom- mended dose for phase II studies will be 75 mg m-2 of docetaxel combined with 5 g m-2 of ifosfamide. Schedule A is advocated for further treatment because this schedule is more manageable and seems to induce less gastrointestinal toxicity than schedule B.