Source: 19495755.pdf
Extracted on: Sat Sep 13 00:02:37 PDT 2025
==================================================

--- Page 1 ---
九州大学学術情報リポジトリ
Kyushu University Institutional Repository
Phase I/II study of the lipiodolization using
DDP-H (CDDP powder; IA-call ®) in patients with
unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma
Yamashita, Yo-ichi
Department of Surgery, Hiroshima Red Cross Hospital, Atomic Bomb Survivors Hospital
Taketomi, Akinobu
Department of Surgery and Science, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University
Itoh, Shinji
Department of Surgery and Science, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University
Harimoto, Norifumi
Department of Surgery and Science, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University
他
https://hdl.handle.net/2324/26585
出版情報：Cancer Chemotherapy and Pharmacology. 65 (2), pp.301-307, 2010-01. Springer Verlag
バージョン：
権利関係：(C) Springer-Verlag 2009

--- Page 2 ---
Yamashita Y et al. 1
Phase I/II study of the lipiodolization using DDP-H (CDDP
powder; IA-call®) in patients with unresectable
hepatocellular carcinoma
Yo-ichi Yamashita, M.D., Ph.D.1), 2), Akinobu Taketomi, M.D., Ph.D.1),
Shinji Itoh, M.D., Ph.D.1), Norifumi Harimoto M.D., Ph.D.1),
Kazutoyo Morita, M.D.1), Takasuke Fukuhara, M.D.1),
Shigeru Ueda, M.D.1), Kensaku Sanefuji, M.D.1),
Keishi Sugimachi, M.D., Ph. D.1), Tsuyoshi Tajima, M.D., Ph.D.3),
Yoshihiko Maehara, M.D., Ph.D., F.A.C.S.1)
1) Department of Surgery and Science, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi , Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan
2) Department of Surgery, Hiroshima Red Cross Hospital and Atomic Bomb Survivors
Hospital, Senda-machi 1-9-6, Naka-ku, Hiroshima 730-8619, JAPAN
3) Department of Clinical Radiology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan
Corresponding Author:
Yo-ichi Yamashita, M.D., Ph.D.
Department of Surgery,
Hiroshima Red Cross Hospital and Atomic Bomb Survivors Hospital,
Senda-machi 1-9-6, Naka-ku, Hiroshima 730-8619, JAPAN
Tel: +81-82-241-3111
Fax: +81-82-246-0676
E-mail: yamashi@surg2.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

--- Page 3 ---
Yamashita Y et al. 2
Abstract
Purpose: Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid (Lipiodol ®), an oily contrast medium, is selectively
retained in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) through hepatic arterial infusion. DDP-H
(IA-call®) developed as a CDDP powder, and may be a possible chemotherapeutic
agent with lipiodol. We carried out a phase I/II trial of the lipiodolization using
DPP-H in patients with unresectable HCC.
Methods: Phase I and pharmacokinetic study: The dose-limiting toxicity (DLT), the
maximum tolerance dose (MTD), and the recommended dose (RD) were determined
using a modified Fibonacci scheme. The concentration-time profile of total platinum
in plasma was analyzed. Phase II study: Thirty-five patients with unresectable HCC
received with lipiodolization using DDP-H under RD, and the efficacy and safety were
assessed.
Results: DLT was grade 3 vomiting at 40 mg/m2. Therefore, MTD and RD were 35
mg/m2. The peak of total platinum in plasma was over 1.0μg/ml at 40 mg/m2 at 30
minutes after infusion. Of the 35 patients, 16 (45.7%) demonstrated a complete
responses (CR), and 4 (11.4 %) demonstrated partial responses (PR) with an additional
9 patients (25.7 %) having stable diseases (SD), as assessed by RECIST. Grade 3
thrombocytopenia was found in 1 patient (2.9%), grade 2 hyperbilirubinemia was found
in 2 patients (5.7%), and grade 2 vomiting was found in 4 patients (11.4%).
Conclusion: Lipiodolization using DDP-H at 35 mg/m2 is effective and well-tolerated
in patients with unresectable HCC.
Key words: Hepatocellular carcinoma・lipiodolization・DDP-H (CDDP powder;
IA-call®)・phase I/II study・Pharmacokinetics

--- Page 4 ---
Yamashita Y et al. 3
INTRODUCTION
Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid (Lipiodol®, Laboratoire Guerbet, Aulnay-sous-Bois,
France), an oily contrast medium, comes from the ethyl ester found in the fatty acid of
poppyseed oil and has been used for hysterosalpingography and lymphography (1), and
has been found to be selectively retained in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) when
injected intra-arterially (2). Our colleagues have reported that intra-arterial injection
of doxorubicin suspended in lipiodol is more effective than intra-arterial injection of
doxorubicin alone for VX2 carcinoma inoculated into rabbit hindlimb, and also that
Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid has the potential to be applied as a carrier of anticancer drugs (3).
The term “lipiodolization”, which has been previously reported by our colleagues (4) ,
refers to the administration of chemotherapeutic agents suspended in this oily contrast
medium and given through feeder arteries. Lipiodolization using doxorubicin or
epirubicin is thus a selective cancer chemotherapy now widely used in Japan, that
provides effective treatment for unresectable HCC (2, 4, 5).
Cisplatin (cis-diaminedichloroplatinum; CDDP) is one of the most effective
drugs in the treatment of malignancies, and excellent anti-cancer effects and
prolongation of survival using CDDP with lipiodol via hepatic artery for the patients
with unresectable HCC have recently been reported (6, 7). To overcome the
incompatibilities of water-soluble CDDP with oily lipiodol, H O was evaporated and
2
NaCl was excluded with some tedious procedures (8).
DDP-H (CDDP-powder; IA-call®, Nipponkayaku, Japan) suitable for the
preparation of high-concentration aqueous solutions has been developed for the
intra-arterial chemotherapeutic agents for HCC. Recently, a phase II study of this new
drug via hepatic arterial infusion was reported (9). Good clinical results such as an
overall response rate 33.8% and a 1-year survival rate of 67.5% were reported, but
substantial toxicity such as grade 3/4 anorexia 22.5% and grade 3/4 thrombocytepenia
25% were reported.
To reduce the toxicities and to increase the anti-tumor activities of DDP-H, we
have newly developed lipiodolization using DDP-H for patients with unresectable HCC.
In the phase I study, the dose-limiting toxicity (DLT), the maximum tolerance dose

--- Page 5 ---
Yamashita Y et al. 4
(MTD), and the recommended dose (RD) were determined using a modified Fibonacci
scheme. At the same time, the concentration-time profile of total platinum in plasma
was analyzed. Then, in the phase II study, 35 patients with unresectable HCC were
received with lipiodolization using DDP-H under RD, and clinical efficacies and
toxicities were evaluated.

--- Page 6 ---
Yamashita Y et al. 5
PATIENTS AND METHODS
Eligibility
HCC patients were considered eligible for the study if they possessed all the
following characteristics: unresectable HCC confirmed histologically or clinically
diagnostic imaging such as computed tomography (CT); measurable lesions confined in
the liver without extra-hepatic metastasis, and in principle, no thrombosis of the portal
trunk, a prominent A-V shunt, or a prominent A-P shunt; no lingering effects of
previous therapy (in principle, a 2-week interval was established for 5-fluorouracil
(5-FU) drugs and biological response modifiers, and a 4-week interval for other
anticancer agents and radiation therapy); performance status of Eastern cooperative
Oncology Group of 0-2; Child-Pugh classification A or B; maintenance of adequate
bone marrow, kidney, and cardiac functions, and meeting the following clinical
laboratory test criteria (white blood cell counts≧3000/mm3, platelet count≧5 x 104/
mm3, hemoglobin concentration≧9.5 g/dL, Serum creatinine value≦the upper limit of
normal range, blood urea nitrogen≦25 mg/dL, and prothrombin activity≧50%); age≧
20; and predictive survival time≧3 months. HCC patients were considered ineligible
if they possessed one of the following characteristics: serious complications other than
chronic hepatitis or liver cirrhosis; > 1 active cancer; a history of serious
hypersensitivity to drugs; pregnant or possibly pregnant women; breastfeeding; and any
other reason that, as per the judgment of the attending physician, made the patient an
unsuitable candidate for this study.
Written informed consent for participation in the study was obtained from each
patient, and the protocol of this phase I/II study was approved by the ethics committee
of the hospital.
DDP-H with Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid
In this study, the fine-powder formulation of DDP-H was suspended directly
into Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid. To observe the structure of DDP-H in Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid,
DDP-H 100 mg, lipiodol 5 ml, and physiologic saline 5 ml were suspended in the 20-ml

--- Page 7 ---
Yamashita Y et al. 6
syringe by pumping 20 times. The miscible suspension was observed using a digital
microscope (VH-800, KEYENCE Inc., Osaka).
Method of administration and dose escalation of DPP-H
The DPP-H-Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid suspension was administered via intra-arterial
infusion using a catheter that was inserted into a nutrient artery of the HCC under X-ray
fluoroscopy. The volume of the Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid was determined according to the
tumor size (e.g., 2.0 ml of lipiodol for HCC with 3-cm diameter, 5.0 ml for 5 cm, 7.5 ml
for over 8 cm). Additional trans-arterial embolizaton using gelatin sponge (songel®)
was carried out, for example, in a very large tumor over 10 cm in diameter, in those
with a high-flow feeding artery, and in those with an A-P shunt.
The starting dose of DPP-H was 25 mg/m2. Dose escalation was carried out
according to a modified Fibonacci scheme. At least three patients were to be entered
at each dose level. If no DLT was noted after the third patient, then the DPP-H dose
was escalated to the next dose level. If one of the three patients experienced a DLT at
any level, an additional three patients were entered at that level. If two of the initial
three patients or two of the six patients experienced a DLT, this dose was considered to
be an MTD dose +1. MTD and RD are the next lower level.
All toxicity was graded according to the National Cancer Institute Common
Toxicity criteria version 3.0. DLT was defined as any of the following: (a) grade 3 or
4 drug-related non-hematologic toxicity such as nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea in the
absence of optimal preventive and supportive measures: (b) grade 4 drug-related
hematologic toxicity.
Pharmacokinetics
Blood samples for the pharmacokinetic evaluation of total platinum
concentrations in plasma were drawn in heparinized tubes at times 0.5, 2, 24, and 96
hours after lipiodolization using DPP-H. Total platinum was analyzed by using an
aliquot of unfiltered plasma. Samples were stored at -20℃ until analyzed, usually for
a time period of a few weeks.

--- Page 8 ---
Yamashita Y et al. 7
Response and toxicity evaluation
Patients were treated at the RD in Phase II. Patients were enrolled between January
and December 2007. Tumor response was assessed using Response Evaluation
Criteria in Solid tumors (RECIST) (10), with computer tomography scans at baseline
and 2 weeks after treatment. Responses were confirmed by computed tomography at
least 8 weeks later. We regarded lipiodol accumulation lesions in tumors as being not
viable or necrosis, and these lesions were excluded from the tumor size. Also in this
phase II study, all toxicity was graded according to the National Cancer Institute
Common Toxicity criteria version 3.0. The primary end point of interest was the
overall response rate, and the secondary endopoint was the safety and tolerability of the
treatment.

--- Page 9 ---
Yamashita Y et al. 8
RESULTS
DDP-H in Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid
The structure of DDP-H in Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid was demonstrated using a
digital microscope (x 500 maginification), as shown in Fig. 1. The DDP-H attached to
the surface of the Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid and gradually dissolved into the surrounding
physiologic saline.
DLT, MTD, and RD
The results of Phase I study to determine the MTD are summarized in Fig. 2.
Dose escalation of DPP-H was performed from 25 mg/m2 with a 5 mg/m2 increase,
respectively. Three patients each was treated at the dose levels 25 mg/m2, 30 mg/m2,
35mg/m2, and 40 mg/m2, and 11 patients were enrolled this Phase I study as a result.
Lipiodolization using DDP-H at 35 mg/m2 could be infused without DLT. However,
grade 3 vomiting was reported in 2 of 2 patients at 40 mg/m2. Therefore, DLT was
vomiting at 40 mg/m2, MTD and RD were 35 mg/m2. Grade 3 or 4 drug-related
hematologic toxicity did not occur.
Pharmacokinetics of DPP-H
The concentration-time profiles of total platinum in plasma are described in Fig.
3. To analyze the effects of Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid to the pharmacokinetics of DPP-H,
the samples were collected from patients with intra-arterial infusion of DPP-H at 25
mg/m2 without Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid (9). The plasma concentrations of DPP-H with
Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid were decreased by half or more compared with DPP-H without
Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid. The peak of plasma concentrations of total platinum of DPP-H
at 40 mg/m2 reached over 1μg/ml at 0.5 hours from infusion.
Patients’ characteristics
From January to December 2007, 35 patients were enrolled in the phase II
study. Lipiodolization using DDP-H at RD as 35 mg/m2 was applied in this phase II
study. Patient characteristics are summarized in Table 1. Continuous variables are

--- Page 10 ---
Yamashita Y et al. 9
expressed as means±S.E. In all, 31 patients (88.6%) had recurrent HCC. Eight
patients (22.9%) were positive for HBs-Ag, and 29 (82.9%) were positive for HCV-Ab.
Twenty nine patients (82.9%) had Child-pugh A liver function, and 6 (22.9%) had
Child-pugh B liver function. The mean tumor diameter was 2.7±1.9 cm, and the
mean tumor number was 3.6±1.8. The tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) stages
according to the latest edition of the International Union against cancer (UICC) (11)
I:II:III:IVA were 6:17:10:2.
Response
The responses of all 35 patients against lipiodolization using DDP-H/lipiodol
are summarized in Table 2. Sixteen patients (45.7%) achieved complete responses
(CR), and 4 (11.4%) achieved partial responses (PR); therefore, the overall response
rate was 57.1%. In addition, 9 patients (25.7%) had stable disease (SD); therefore, the
disease control rate was 82.9%. Six patients (17.1%) showed sign of progressive
disease (PD).
The CT imagings of the CR case are shown in Fig 4. Recurrent HCC was
demonstrated as an early-enhancing tumor at Segment 8 based on Couinaud’s
classification (12) (left figure). Two weeks after lipiodolization using DDP-H, CT
imaging revealed a complete accumulation of Lipiodol Ultra-Fluidto in this recurrent
HCC, and there was no enhancing lesion (middle figure). This Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid
accumulation was maintained in the CT imaging 8 weeks after lipiodolization using
DDP-H (right figure).
In contrast, the CT imagings of the PD case are shown in Fig. 5. Recurrent
HCC was demonstrated as a slightly enhancing tumor at the Speagel lobe (left figure).
Two weeks after lipiodolization using DDP-H, CT imaging revealed only partial
accumulation of Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid in this recurrent HCC, and there were a small
enhancing lesion (middle figure). The size of this enhancing lesion on recurrent HCC
increased on CT imaging 8 weeks after lipiodolization using DDP-H (right figure).
Toxicities
Toxicities were evaluated in all patients and are summarized in Table 3.

--- Page 11 ---
Yamashita Y et al. 10
According to the hematologic toxicity, grade 3 thrombocytopenia developed in 1 patient
(2.9%), and grade 2 hyperbirilubinemia developed in 2 patients (5.7%).
Non-hematologic toxicity was more significant, but severe toxicity such as grade 3 or 4
was not seen in this phase II study. Grade 2 vomiting developed in 4 patients (11.4%),
and grade 1 vomiting developed in 8 patients (22.9%). Grade 1 appetite loss, grade 1
diarrhea, and grade 1 constipation developed in 1 patient (2.9%), respectively.

--- Page 12 ---
Yamashita Y et al. 11
DISCUSSION
Although the mechanism by which Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid selectively
accumulates in HCC is not well understood, the aim of using Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid in the
present study was to achieve a targeting delivery system resulting in long-lasting drug
accumulation in HCC and slow release, with accompanying augmented anticancer
effects and reduced systemic side effects. Microscope observation of DDP-H in
Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid with physiologic saline demonstrated that the DDP-H attached to
the surface of the Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid, and then gradually dissolved into the
surrounding physiologic saline. This finding suggested the possibility that DDP-H
with Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid could demonstrate better anti-tumor effects and improved
safety. The particles of DDP-H with Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid, however, were unequal,
with many large particles more than 10μm in diameter. It is an important challenge
to control the size distribution of DDP-H particles with Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid.
In 1984, our colleagues found that water-soluble anti-cancer agents, including
almost all of the currently available drugs for treating cancers that do not dissolve in oil,
could be effectively mixed with lipiodol when a water-soluble contrast medium
(Urographin®) was intermediate (13). At present, anti-cancer drug/lipiodol
suspensions are made by employing various homemade mixtures under many tedious
procedures. In addition, CDDP is poorly soluble in water, and the solubility in water
is only 1 mg/ml. In lipodolization, an anti-cancer drug/lipiodol suspension is infused
in a “one-shot style” from a nutrient hepatic artery. Therefore, the maximum total
amount of suspension was considered to be approximately 10 ml or less. To overcome
the low solubility of CDDP in water, CDDP powder was made by evaporation of H O
2
and exclusion of NaCl, as described previously (6), and DDP-H was developed.
Takaki have recently demonstrated a suitable blending method for lipiodol-cisplatin
powder as a suspension-emulsion that is a suspension of lipiodol and cisplatin powder
emulsified with contrast medium by evaluation of sustained release and accumulation
nature (14).
We conducted a phase I study for the purpose of determining DLT, MTD, and RD
of lipiodolization using DPP-H. The RD in hepatic arterial infusion of DPP-H for

--- Page 13 ---
Yamashita Y et al. 12
advanced HCC was determined at a dose of 65 mg/m2 and at a rate of 2.8 mg/min (9).
However, we should newly determine the MTD and RD of lipiodolization using DPP-H,
as we infused DPP-H with Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid in a “one-shot style”. Dose escalation
from 25 mg/m2 was carried out according to a modified Fibonacci scheme, and our
phase I study determined that DLT was vomiting at 40 mg/m2, MTD and RD were 35
mg/m2. DLT (vomiting) occurred within 1 hour after infusion; therefore we will
routinely use 5-HT receptor antagonist before lipiodolization in the next phase II study.
3
In our pharmacokinetic study, the peak plasma concentrations of total platinum
of DPP-H at a dose of 40 mg/m2 reached over 1μg/ml after 0.5 hours from infusion.
Hirata has discussed that the limit of accompanying severe adverse effects during
CDDP infusions is 1μg/ml (15); therefore the occurrence of DLT at 40 mg/m2 was
related to the excess over 1μg/ml of total platinum concentrations in plasma. In
another CDDP-Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid clinical studies, Shibata reported the results of a
pharmacokinetic study of CDDP form hepatic arterial infusion (8). They reported that
the peak plasma total platinum concentrations occur 5 to 60 minutes after the infusion,
and reach 2.78±0.98μg/ml when 40-100 mg CDDP is infused. They also reported
that the concentrations of total platinum gradually fell after 60 minutes, but maintained
relatively high concentrations as 1.26±0.74μg/ml after 7 days. Compared to their
reports, the peak of plasma total platinum concentrations in the present study was low,
and speedily fell down to 0.5μg/ml or below at 4 days after infusion. These results
could indicate better and more long-lasting local accumulations of DDP-H on HCC in
our study, but it will be essential to analyze the total platinum concentrations in tissue
by our methods compared to their results. Fujiyama have similarly reported a low
peak of plasma concentrations of total platinum as 10 ng/ml or below in their newly
developed SM-11355/lipiodol complex study (17).
DDP-H was originally developed to be used in hepatic arterial infusion.
Yoshikawa have reported relatively mediocre clinical results from a phase II study of
the hepatic arterial infusion of DDP-H without Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid (9). Their
response rate was 33.8%, and severe adverse effects (grade 3 or more) sometimes
occured including anorexia in 22.5%, vomiting in 6.3%, thrombocytopenia in 25%,
neutropenia in 13%, and elevation of serum aspartate aminotransferase in 32.5%. Our

--- Page 14 ---
Yamashita Y et al. 13
good clinical results (response rate; 57.1%) and low toxicity (grade 3
thrombocytopenia; 2.9%) might have been brought about by the good targeting delivery
system of Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid on HCC.
Some reports have demonstrated the good clinical effects of lipiodolization
using CDDP against advanced HCC (6-8, 16, 17) and the superiority of the clinical
results of lipiodolization using CDDP compared to those of doxorubicin (7, 18, 19).
Maeda have reported an overall response rate of lipiodolization using homemade CDDP
powder of 59.4% (142/239 cases), and Okusaka have reported that the CR rate of
lipiodolization using SM-11355 is 56.3% (9/16 cases) (6,17). Despite the differences
in evaluation rules, our results for a phase II study for which the overall response rate
was 57.1% (20/35 cases) and the CR rate was 45.7% (16/35 cases) should be
comparable to the above good results. Almost all CR cases in the above studies
including ours, HCC did not disappear but had complete accumulation of lipiodol on
tumors. On the other hand, Okusaka have reported a relatively high rate of toxicity for
which the grade 3 toxicities included neutropenia (19%), total bilirubin elevation (19%),
asparate aminotransferase (AST) elevation (44%), and alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
elevation (19%) (17). But in our phase II study with respect to severe toxicity, there
was only 1 case with grade 3 thrombocytopenia (2.9%). One of the possible causes of
our improved clinical results of lipiodolization using DDP-H compared to historical
results of lipiodolization using CDDP would depend on the better and longer lasting
local accumulations of DDP-H on HCC. But this hypothesis has no evidence and
should be confirmed by analyzing the total platinum concentrations in HCC.
There are some technical differences in how lipiodolzaition is carried out,
especially regarding inserting into the nutrient hepatic artery, and these differences may
lead to differences in clinical results. Another possible causes of our improved clinical
results of lipiodolization using DDP-H compared to historical results of lipiodolization
using CDDP would depend on the superior technique in inserting into the nutrient
hepatic artery. Therefore, further study is necessary to compare the clinical results of
lipiodolization using DDP-H or doxorubicin/epirubicin in our own institution. In
conclusion, lipiodolization using DDP-H at 35 mg/m2 is effective and well tolerated in
patients with unresectable HCC.

--- Page 15 ---
Yamashita Y et al. 14
REFERENCES
1. Sheehan R, Hreschchyshyn M, Lin RK, Lessman FP (1961) The use of
lymphography as a diagnostic method. Radiology 76: 47-53.
2. Konno T, Maeda H, Iwai K, Maki S, Tashiro S, Uchida M, Miyauchi Y (1984)
Selective targeting of anti-cancer drug and simultaneous image enhancement in
solid tumors by arterially administered lipid contrast medium. Cancer 54:
2367-74.
3. Furuta T, Kanematsu T, Kakizoe S, Sugimachi K (1988) Selective effect of
doxorubicin suspended in lipiodol on VX2 carcinoma in rabbits. J Surg Oncol 39:
229-34.
4. Kanematsu T, Furuta T, Takenaka K, Matsumata T, Yoshida Y, Nishizaki T, Hasuo
K, Sugimachi K (1989) A 5-year experience of lipiodolization: selective regional
chemotherapy for 200 patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 10:
98-102.
5. Ogita S, Tokiwa K, Taniguchi H, Takahashi T (1987) Intraarterial chemotherapy
with lipid contrast medium for hepatic malignancies in infants. Cancer 60:
2886-90.
6. Maeda S, Shibata J, Fujiyama S, Tanaka M, Noumaru S, Sato K, Tomita K (2003)
Long-term follow-up of hepatic arterial chemoembolization with cisplatin
suspended in iodized oil for hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatogastroenterology
50: 809-13.
7. Kamada K, Nakanishi T, Kitamoto M, Aikata H, Kawakami Y, Ito K, Asahara T,
Kajiyama G (2001) Long-term prognosis of patients undergoing transcatheter
arterial chemoembolization for unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma: comparison
of cisplatin lipiodol suspension and doxorubicin hydrochloride emulsion. J Vasc
Interv Radiol 12: 847-54.
8. Shibata J, Fujiyama S, Sato T, Kishimoto S, Fukushima S, Nakano M (1989).
Hepatic arterial injection chemotherapy with cisplatin suspended in an oily
lymphographic agent for hepatocellular carcinoma. Cancer 64: 1586-94.

--- Page 16 ---
Yamashita Y et al. 15
9. Yoshikawa M, Ono N, Yodono H, Ichida T, Nakamura H (2008) Phase II study of
hepatic arterial infusion of a fine-powder formulation of cisplatin for advanced
hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatol Res 38: 474-83.
10. Therasse P, Arbuck SG, Eisenhauer EA, Wanders J, Kaplan RS, Rubinstein L,
Verweij J, Van Glabbeke M, van Oosterom AT, Christian MC, Gwyther SG (2000)
New guidelines to evaluate the response to treatment in solid tumors. European
Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer, National Cancer Institute of
the United States, National Cancer Institute of Canada. J Natl Cancer Inst 92:
205-16.
11. Sobin LH, Wittekind CH, eds (1997) TNM Classification of Malignant Tumor (ed
5). New York, NY, Wiley-Liss.
12. Coinaud C (1954) Lobes et segments hepatiques［in French］. Press Med; 62:
709-712.
13. Kanematsu T, Inokuchi K, Sugimachi K, Furuta T, Sonoda T, Tamura S, Hasuo K
(1984) Selective effects of Lipiodolized antitumor agents. J Surg Oncol 25:
218-26.
14. Takaki Y, Kaminou T, Shabana M, Ihaya T, Otsubo K, Ogawa T (2008) Suitable
blending method of lipiodol-cisplatin in transcatheter arterial embolization for
hepatocellular carcinoma: evaluation of sustained release and accumulation nature.
Hepatogastroenterology 55: 202-6.
15. Hirata K (1995) Combined chemotherapy with 5-FU+cis-platin or UFT+cisplatin.
Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 22: 1009-17.
16. Fujiyama S, Shibata J, Maeda S, Tanaka M, Noumaru S, Sato K, Tomita K (2003)
Phase I clinical study of a novel lipophilic platinum complex (SM-11355) in
patients with hepatocellular carcinoma refractory to cisplatin/lipiodol. Br J Cancer
89: 1614-9.
17. Okusaka T, Okada S, Nakanishi T, Fujiyama S, Kubo Y (2004) Phase II trial of
intra-arterial chemotherapy using a novel lipophilic platinum derivative
(SM-11355) in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma. Invest New Drugs. 22:
169-76.

--- Page 17 ---
Yamashita Y et al. 16
18. Ueno K, Miyazono N, Inoue H, Nishida H, Kanetsuki I, Nakajo M (2000)
Transcatheter arterial chemoembolization therapy using iodized oil for patients with
unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma: evaluation of three kinds of regimens and
analysis of prognostic factors. Cancer. 88: 1574-81.
19. Ono Y, Yoshimasu T, Ashikaga R, Inoue M, Shindou H, Fuji K, Araki Y,
Nishimura Y (2000) Long-term results of lipiodol-transcatheter arterial
embolization with cisplatin or doxorubicin for unresectable hepatocellular
carcinoma. Am J Clin Oncol. 23: 564-8.

--- Page 18 ---
Yamashita Y et al. 17
FIGURE LEGENDS
Figure 1. The structure of DDP-H in Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid was demonstrated using a
digital microscope (x 500 maginification). The DDP-H was attached to the surface of
the Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid, and gradually dissolved into surrounding physiologic saline.
Figure 2. The results of a Phase I study to determine the MTD. Dose escalation of
DPP-H was performed from 25 mg/m2 with a 5 mg/m2 increase, respectively. Grade 3
vomiting was reported in 2 of 2 patients at 40 mg/m2. Therefore, DLT was vomiting at
40 mg/m2, MTD and RD were 35 mg/m2.
Figure 3. The concentration-time profiles of total platinum in plasma were described.
The plasma concentrations of DPP-H with Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid were decreased by half
or more compared with DPP-H without Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid. The peak plasma
concentrations of total platinum of DPP-H at 40 mg/m2 reached over 1μg/ml 0.5 hours
after infusion.
Figure 4. The CT imagings of the CR case were demonstrated. Recurrent HCC was
demonstrated as early-enhancing tumor at Segment 8 (left figure). Two weeks after
lipiodolization using DDP-H, CT imaging revealed a complete accumulation of
Lipiodol Ultra-Fluidto in this recurrent HCC, and there were no enhancing lesions
(middle figure). This Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid accumulation was maintained at CT
imaging 8 weeks after lipiodolization using DDP-H (right figure).
Figure 5. The CT imagings of the PD case were demonstrated. Recurrent HCC was
demonstrated as a slightly enhancing tumor at the Speagel lobe (left figure). Two
weeks after lipiodolization using DDP-H, CT imaging revealed only a partial
accumulation of Lipiodol Ultra-Fluid in this recurrent HCC, and there were a small
enhancing lesion (middle figure). The size of this enhancing lesion on recurrent HCC
increased on CT imaging 8 weeks after lipiodolization using DDP-H (right figure).

--- Page 19 ---
Figure 1

--- Page 20 ---
Figure 2

--- Page 21 ---
Figure 3

--- Page 22 ---
Figure 4

--- Page 23 ---
Figure 5